Welcome back everyone.
In this lecture we're going to show you how to work with the categorical data in our data set.
So we just took care of the missing data.
Now let's explore the categorical data and the string data and see if we either remove it or convert
it to dummy variables using one hot encoding.
Let's head back to the Jupiter notebook and continue where we left off.
OK here I am at the notebook again.
We've already taken care of all the known values I can see here from before.
We have no more null values.
So now we need to do is take care of categorical variables.
So the first task is to list all the columns that are currently non numeric and there's two helpful
links here that essentially show you how to quickly get it through a very useful method call and the
way we can do that is if you check out those links it would tell you to run DFS select D types and we
could have selected pass an object as a single item string and then called Dot columns and that only
selects the essentially string columns.
So now we have to do is we have to go through each of these term grades sub grade et cetera and see
what we should do with them.
Some of them will just remove others will be useful to us and we'll keep them.
So we have to decide and the first we're going to start off with is term.
So let's go ahead and check out term and if we check it out term in fact we can do a feature Information
request on term from that function that we have for you is the number of payments on the loan.
And values are in months and can either be 36 months or 60 months.
And if we take a look at f term and call value counts.
Notice it's essentially a binary column there's either thirty six months or six months which means we
have a couple of options here because it's also numeric.
I could convert this to be either 36 as an American integer or 60 as a numeric integer so directly just
grab these basically first two numbers and convert them into an integer.
The other thing I could do is because it's technically just two categories is I could one hot encode
it to be either 36 months or not 36 months now because there is a numeric relationship between 36 and
60 months.
Let's go ahead and keep that numeric relationship essentially showing you the relationship between having
more time to pay off the loan.
So we're going to do is we'll map this directly to 36 and 60 and there's many ways you could do this.
One way is to just create a dictionary called some mapping and then map 30 six month string to the numeric
36 60 month string to the number 60.
But another way we could do this is by grabbing those first two characters in the string and converting
those into an actual number.
So the way you would do that is by applying a function that does that Orland expression.
So we're going to do is to save a little bit space we'll do a land expression.
We're essentially going to go through the terms and for the terms we'll grab the first two characters
sets everything up to bet on including index three and then we will convert that into an integer and
then we'll say def term is equal to the F term and we apply that.
So we'll go ahead and run that.
Keep in mind you may get a warning but in this case that is OK is essentially warning you that you're
taking an existing column and then reassigning it.
So just telling you what you kind of already know and if you take a look at the f term now you'll notice
now just 36 and 60.
So it can actually run this value counts again and we see we essentially converted three six months
60 months to the integers 36 and 60.
So that column has now been taken care of it's now numeric column that we can pass into tensor flow.
The next we're going to take a look at is the great feature and we actually already know that grade
is simply a part of sub grade.
So we can just drop the great feature because recall it sub grade already had that information if something
was sub grade G1 then we already knew as part of the G grade.
So that's essentially duplicate information.
So we'll go ahead and drop it.
Let's just say the f is equal to D F that drop and we'll say grade X is equal to 1.
Keep in mind whenever you're running these drop method calls or function calls you can only run them
once.
Otherwise you can error because you can't drop something more than once.
So we go ahead and run that and now we no longer have that column and now we're going to do is we're
going to convert these sub grade column into dummy variables and then we'll concatenate these new columns
to the original data frame.
A couple of things to remember from the lectures is to drop the original site grade column since we
won't need it after that and to add drop underscore first is equal to true in your get dummies call
to prevent the multi variable trap essentially prevent encoding duplicate information.
So let's go ahead and check this out.
Lots of different ways you can do this but there's essentially three main steps.
The first step is to actually get the dummy variables.
So we'll say dummies is equal to PD dot get dummies and then I'm going to obtain them from the sub grade
column.
So I have my sub great column and recall since it's a column I need to also say here that drop first
is equal to true and that eventually will stop us from encoding duplicate information.
So that's why we dropped the first one.
You can imagine in the case if we had some sort of a gender or sex column where it was male or female
we don't need to encode both for them to be zeros and ones instead.
That would just get converted to whether or not they're male 0 or 1.
Otherwise you're duplicating the information and that's the same thing.
If you start expanding to more categories so if you have ABC as your categories.
So if you have ABC you don't need to encode that 2 0 1 0 or something like that.
You just need the A and B columns because if it's not and if it's not b that's implied that it's going
to be C..
So that's why we have the drop first versus equal to true there.
Okay.
So after that we need to concatenate that with the actual data frame.
So we're going to say D F and first we'll drop the original sub grade column because we won't need it
anymore since we have the dummies.
And then what we'll do is concatenate that with the dummies.
So say PD concatenate this.
We pass this as a list concatenate it with make sure it says X is equal to 1 with the dropping of the
sub grade and then say sub grade
actually just say dummies here
and then we'll say axes is equal to 1.
So we do that function call and then we set that to our existing data frame.
So really just two main lines of code.
First one is to get the dummies themselves off the sub great column and then the next one is to make
sure to remove that original column and then concatenate it with the dummies along the columns.
And that's essentially all there is to this.
And you have to make sure that your brackets and parentheses match up.
Looks like we're good here.
So let's go ahead and run this.
And there we go.
So now if I take a look at the FDR columns you'll notice I have a lot more columns because now we have
one high encoding for each of the possible upgrades.
And we did drop the very first one which was 8 1.
OK so there are my columns now and we're going to continue 1.
I mean go ahead and comment that out and now we're going to essentially do the same thing for verification
status application type initial status and the purpose column.
So if you take a look at these other columns there are also good candidates for being converted into
dummy variables because there's not a whole lot of categories and they're pretty much also for the most
of these binary or just a few categories.
So they're good candidates to go ahead and convert them into dummy variables so we can actually do this
with essentially the exact same steps we did up here.
So I can simply just copy and paste these and then put them in here and what I'm going to do is I just
need to cover these columns and we set him up in a way here that you can just copy and paste.
So we're going to convert and get dummies and what to get them is command you can pass in all of these
guys at once and then we'll go ahead and also drop the original columns at once.
So we'll go ahead and do that as well.
And that's pretty much it.
So it's actually the exact same commands before you just pass and a list of the columns now which is
kind of nice.
So no extra work we need to do.
We'll go ahead and run that.
Let me take a little bit more time.
Case it was pretty fast here but we went ahead and took care of those columns.
OK now for home ownership we'll go ahead and review the value counts here for the Home Ownership column
to get something that looks like this.
So say IDF homeownership and if you do value counts here what you'll end up noticing is that essentially
most people are in either three categories mortgaging renting or owning and then just very few are and
other none are any.
So what we're going to do here is because there's so few people in none or any let's just go ahead and
put these guys is twenty nine and three in the other category.
So that way we reduce the number of actual feature columns because we don't want an entire feature column
for just twenty nine plus three people instead we'll go ahead and put those in the other so to begin
this we first want to replace none and any with other and the replace Link will actually show you this
call which allows you to directly replace string values of other string values so we can see here there
is documentation on how this actually works.
But essentially the call looks like this.
We say and there's many ways you could do this you could also just map it.
You could say none in any get map to other or just do your custom apply function but the only thing
actually have to do here is called homeownership and say replace and you can pass and a list of what
you want to replace.
So this case owner replace none.
And any any pass as a second parameter which you want to replace them with in this case.
I want to replace them with other so you could do this either if a dictionary mapping your custom apply
function or with this convenience replace function lots of the four ways you could do this so go ahead
and run that replacement.
So now if I run value counts again.
Notice those twenty nine plus three people have been added to the other column.
So now we'll convert this into dummy variables and to do that I will simply copy paste what we have
before.
So let me copy this guy will come back down here to homeownership paste that in and replace some grade
with homeownership.
So put that guy in there and put that in there.
OK so go ahead and run that.
And now we've replaced homeownership.
Keep in mind you should only be able to run these one time otherwise you'll start getting errors.
Now the next column we're going to take a look at is the address column.
So we're going to do is if we actually take a look at examples of the address column it looks like it's
somebodies full address.
So it's some sort of address number a street estate.
And then it looks like we also have zip codes where we're going to be doing is we're going to be actually
feature engineering by extracting the zip code from this.
And there's many different ways you can do this.
One way is to use the same technique we used up here when we were extracting the actual numbers from
the 36 and 60 string.
So notice that the zip code is always going to be the last five digits here.
So we have these last five digits which means if I were to apply a function or lambda expression either
one if I said lambda.
Go ahead and take a look at that address and then grab starting from position negative five all the
way to the end and run that that will actually grab that last item of information.
So if I take a look at this I can say DLF ZIP code is equal to that extraction from the actual address
column.
So we run that and that we're going to do is take a look at making this zip code column into dummy variables
so we can essentially make a category per zip code.
And if I did def zip code and then called value counts on it you'll notice that there's actually not
that many unique zip codes here.
So we run this and it looks like there's a total of 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 zip codes.
So that's not totally unreasonable to then create 10 dummy features off of this essentially nine extra
columns since we're going to drop the first one.
So we'll just copy and paste the same code that we've been doing up here.
But now we will replace homeownership with this new zip code column that we created.
So go ahead and grab that and then we're going to pass this in OK we will run that and then we're going
to do is we'll go ahead and drop that original address column since we won't be needing anymore.
So say DLF is equal to the F drop and then we'll go ahead pass and address there along axes is equal
to 1.
OK so that took care of the address column.
Next one is issue underscore D.
So if we take a look at the feature information for this guy and run it you'll notice that this feature
information indicates the month which the loan was funded.
And if we actually think about the problem we're trying to solve here is we're trying to specify based
off someone's already known features whether or not they're going to pay back alone which ideally that's
going to happen before we actually issue them alone.
Because if we think they're not going to actually pay back the loan we will issue one in the first place.
So we in reality won't have an issue date for when we're actually running the model.
It's not like we're ever going to know that we issue them alone.
Otherwise that kind of defeats the whole purpose of the model.
So this is actually data leakage since realistically speaking upon application of the model you won't
have an issue date.
So we'll go ahead and just drop this column we'll say the f is equal to the F drop issue date along
axis is equal to 1.
OK.
Next one is this earliest credit line.
So if we take a look at this function or this feature closely in fact we can just call feature information
here and pass in earliest credit line.
This appears to be the month the borrower's earliest reported credit line was open.
So there's a historical timestamp feature.
So we're we're going to do is we're going to extract the year from this feature using a dot apply function.
So there's lots of different ways you can do this.
But for first going to convert it to some sort of date feature or we can actually just grab it based
off its position.
So let's take a look at the examples in the sexual column.
We'll say earliest credit line run that.
And notice right now it's essentially three letters for a month a dash and then the year of the earliest
credit line.
So what we'll do here is we can either convert this to a date time and then extract with an attribute
call the year or just grab the last four characters in the string and convert that to an integer.
That's by slightly easier to do.
So we'll go ahead and do that approach although either one is totally valid.
So we're would say apply lambda.
And on this date go ahead and starting from position negative for go all the way to the end to grab
those last four characters and then we will convert that to an integer and we'll say def earliest credit
line is now equal to this.
So we'll go ahead and run that and we'll say IDF earliest credit line.
And now if we take a look at it we have this new column.
Now keep in mind if you follow these task instructions exactly.
We did ask you to create a new column called earliest credit year and then drop the earliest credit
line feature is essentially the same thing if you just overwrite it.
So you can overwrite it or assign it to some new column and then drop it really up to you main idea
here is that we essentially just want the year since that's something we can work with.
And in fact we can further explore this by doing value counts on it.
And note here that we have value accounts that make sense and we don't need to convert this to dummy
variables because the year itself can be treated as a continuous data type.
OK.
So moving along the next series of steps will just be pre processing things like train test splits as
well as scaling the data.
So we'll go ahead and take care of that in the next lecture.
I'll see you there.